# Proliferation-Variable-Excel-Template-
This EXCEL sheet allows the user to enter peak fractions calculated by FlowJo upon gating each peak of a sample and automatically calculates "%Undivided" for each generation and plots "Theta(i) vs. (i)"

**Refer To Figures A.11-A.14** of  Wissam Charab 2018 Dissertation 
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
A common way of analyzing proliferation of dye-stained cells includes using FACS to calculate the percentage of cells in a sample that have the highest intensity (referred to herein as X1); however, utilizing this variable alone can be misleading and insufficient in mathematically describing proliferation faithfully141.  Figure A.12 provides a theoretical situation that exemplifies the misuse of using X1 alone in describing proliferation. 
Figure A.12 presents theoretical situations where activated T cells are given one of four treatments (green, blue, red, or orange). In each case, the brightest peak observed by FACS (aka X1) makes up 20% of observed events. Using X1 alone to describe and quantify proliferation would erroneously suggest that all four treatments are affecting the cells the same way- even though the proliferation profiles are clearly visually and quantifiably different:
Green-treated cells divide 5 times overall; red-treated , orange-treated, and blue-treated cells divide 2 times, 1 time, and 2 times overall, respectively. Furthermore, X1 does not indicate what percentage of treated-cells did divide. For instance, if 1000 cells were stained then green-treated, and only 100 cells divided, that percentage would be 90%- that is, 90% of treated cells did not divide. Nonetheless, the 100 cells that do divide may divide once and add another 100 cells to culture, or they may divide twice and add 400 cells to culture, etc.… 
Days later, the initially-100 dividing cells would overtake the culture due to their exponential growth and could greatly outnumber the “undivided cells” that were inhibited by the green treatment. The more those responding cells divide the smaller X1 will appear.   This phenomenon is especially important to T cells due to the high diversity of T cell subsets that exist. The small percentage of cell, in the above scenario for example, may not be the same “T cell subset” as those that were inhibited by the green treatment. In other words, important underlying biology could be overlooked due to depending on one single variable - X1.
Therefore, a lump variable that (1) captures the entire profile and (2) can be calculated for each population or subset (i.e. generation) may prove most useful. The “% undivided” (or alternatively “% divided”) may be determined for each cell generation. For brevity, in this work, “% undivided” is represented by Φi and “% divided” is referred to as θi, where “i” is the generation number. Common software platforms like FlowJo® (version 10 or newer) can automatically calculate “% undivided” or “Φ1” for the first (parental) cell generation.
Figure A.13 illustrates a more elaborate example that emphasizes the difference between Φ1 (% undivided) and the commonly used X1 (% brightest peak calculated by FACS). In this example, X1 is 29% (calculated as 650 divided by the sum of 650+325+250+1000) whereas Φ1 is 65% (calculated as 650/1000).
Furthermore, in this example, 325 cells of generation #2 were left at the end of the experiment. However, (200*2 + 50*2 + 100*2) 700 cells of generation #2 existed at some point in culture; that is, 375 of these cells divided whereas 325 cells did not. Hence, Φ2 is 325/700 which is ~46%. Alternatively, θ2 is 375/700 which is ~54%. Consequently, plotting “θi vs. i"- which describes the “% divided” for each cell generation- essentially yields a mathematical representation of the FACS-derived proliferation curves. This allows for both quantifying and capturing all the information present in a proliferation curve generate by FACS.
Figure A.14 lists the equation needed to calculate “% undivided” or “Φ1” manually via EXCEL after calculating peak area (%) from FACS gates. Alternatively, the proliferation platform in the newer versions of FlowJo may be used to calculate this variable.  FlowJo uses the same algorithm as that presented above but only calculates “% undivided” for generation #1. Regardless,  using the above equation also allows for calculating the “% divided” (referred to herein θi) within each T cell generation. An EXCEL template containing the algorithm is provided.  
